Due Dates. Do They Even Matter?


I can hear some people reading that title who say "Of course, Due Dates matter a great deal."  I disagree. Now I am not saying destroy your calendars or turn in everything whenever you want to your clients and stakeholders.  What I am suggesting is that all dates picked for pretty much all projects are arbitrary when they are picked and the Due Date is the most flexible element of any task. What is actually more important than a date on a calendar is how we set expectations and communicate changes to app parties involved.  

When we do any task we etimate how much time it should take us given the then current circumstance. But in the real world circumstances change as data is gathered and priorities shift around. I have seen many a project become extremely stressful and teams strearched to a breaking point.  Worse yet, I have seen way too many poorly done or not quite finished deliverables handed over because they were working under deadline and distractions abounded.  Neither of these sccenarios are sustainable nor desied.  

I have also observed in my set of experiences that we don't take into account Hofstadter's Law https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hofstadter%27s_law quite enough, which says: "It always takes longer than you expect, even when you take into account Hofstadter's Law." This leads me to a conclusion that no matter how we try and parse it, no matter what formula we try to follow, there is no magical time estimate system that is going to produce precise time stimates that are always going to remain accurate over time.  

Now, for many projects do we get the timing about right. Sometimes we even get done earlier than estimated. If we do get done early, that is a miss on the time estimate as well, but with less consequenses. However, it also supports my premise that giving time estimates is educated guessing best. 

Why we think Due Dates matter comes down to a larger set of expectations around any task or project. And in complex scenarios and prjects using a Waterfall methodology, dependencies are a very real thing, where we can't do the next bit until the previous bit is finished. When deadlines get missed it can easily create a domino effect of putting everyone in a rushed and stressful mindset and will almost asurredly cause subpar work to be dlievered.  

So what are we to do? The path I have seen the most successful projects follow has been to acknoledge that the dates were picked based on certain facts and any changes needed to those timeline estimates are clearly communicated to all team members as clearly as possible.  That communication is critical and is far more important than the date on the calendar for the vast majority of projects. 

People react negatively to surprises and changes, especially if you have lead them to believe one thing and then don't fufill the obligation you describe. If we manage expecttions and communicate that change is inevitable, most people are going to have a much better reaction than to a missed delivery date or sub-par work cobbled together just to make the deadline.  

Next time you discuss timelines with your stakeholders and/or teammates, ask them about timelines and scenarios of getting done by x date versus one day out, versus one week out. I am willing to bet that they rarely have such a conversation, as most people want to give time estimates and then not talk about them again until they are either met or missed.  Being realistic with others involved in a project is going to build a true sense of trust. That trust is what is going to let you work together to build real value.  

If you never have an issue with stressing about a deadline or turning in 'good enough' work to make sure a timeline is fufilled, then count yourself lucky.  This post was not for you.  For the rest of humanity, we can't create more time. It is a constant we will always have to contend with being a fixed number.  We have control over a great number of other factors though.  If we make communication about the realities of our situations a top priority rather than always chasing a calendar, we are going to end up with healthier client relationships and overall better work.  

So, at the end of it all, I say Due Dates are always arbitrary. Aligning and then meeting client expectations by clearly communicating throught the project should take far higher priority for any work you are doing. If we manage our projects and processes with ransparency and realism, we can get a lot more done and with much happier teams and stakeholders overall.  